Java - Sending Email
To send an e-mail using your Java Application is simple enough but to start with you should have JavaMail API and Java Activation Framework (JAF) installed on your machine.
You can download  latest version of JavaMail (Version 1.2) from Java's standard website.
You can download  latest version of JAF (Version 1.1.1) from Java's standard website.
Download and unzip these files, in the newly created top level directories you will find a number of jar files for both the applications. You need to add mail.jar and activation.jar files in your CLASSPATH.
Send a Simple E-mail
Here is an example to send a simple e-mail from your machine. It is assumed that your localhost is connected to the Internet and capable enough to send an e-mail.
Compile and run this program to send a simple e-mail −
If you want to send an e-mail to multiple recipients then the following methods would be used to specify multiple e-mail IDs −
Here is the description of the parameters −
type − This would be set to TO, CC or BCC. Here CC represents Carbon Copy and BCC represents Black Carbon Copy. Example: Message.RecipientType.TO
addresses − This is an array of e-mail ID. You would need to use InternetAddress() method while specifying email IDs.
Send an HTML E-mail
Here is an example to send an HTML e-mail from your machine. Here it is assumed that your localhost is connected to the Internet and capable enough to send an e-mail.
This example is very similar to the previous one, except here we are using setContent() method to set content whose second argument is "text/html" to specify that the HTML content is included in the message.
Using this example, you can send as big as HTML content you like.
Compile and run this program to send an HTML e-mail −
Send Attachment in E-mail
Here is an example to send an e-mail with attachment from your machine. Here it is assumed that your localhost is connected to the internet and capable enough to send an e-mail.
Compile and run this program to send an HTML e-mail −
User Authentication Part
If it is required to provide user ID and Password to the e-mail server for authentication purpose, then you can set these properties as follows −
Rest of the e-mail sending mechanism would remain as explained above.
